# Large volume size-fractioned filtration yields novel insights on prokaryotic community composition and interactions in the eastern tropical North Pacific ocean
## Madeleine A. Thompson, David L. Valentine, Xuefeng Peng

Raw reads generated in this study are available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) under BioProject PRJNA911303. 

### Summary 
Marine microorganisms are key drivers of biogeochemical cycles in the world’s ocean, including oxygen minimum zones (OMZs). Using a metabarcoding survey of the 16S rRNA gene, we investigated bacterial and archaeal communities at the coastal, offshore, and peripheral OMZ of the eastern tropical North Pacific. Water samples were collected along a sharp vertical oxygen gradient, and large volumes (23 - 69 L) were filtered through three size fractions, 0.2 μm, 2 μm, and 22 μm. Differential abundance analysis revealed that the changes in community composition along the oxygen gradient was primarily driven by Planctomycetota, Bacteroidota, Verrucomicrobiota, and Gammaproteobacteria, most of which were known for their high hydrolytic potentials and usually associated with the large particle-associated size fraction (> 22 μm). Roseibacillus was particularly abundant in the large particle-associated size fraction and likely couple carbon and nitrogen cycling while producing nitrous oxide. Network analysis using a pipeline that removes indirect interactions resulted in a smaller number of nodes and edges compared to previous studies, but it identified putative keystone species that are likely denitrifying and nitrogen fixing lineages in both the free-living (Rhodospirillales) and large particle-associated fractions (Pseudoalteromonas and Photobacterium). Our findings highlight the utility of large volume size-fractioned filtration in providing novel insights in marine microbial ecology. 


